Let's see if we can improve on our
analysis of the Leinhardt data
by extending our linear model
on infant mortality to
incorporate the region variable.
We will do this with a hierarchical model
where each region has its own intercept.
First we need to read in the car
library and the Leinhardt dataset.
Let's reacquaint ourselves
with the dataset really fast.
We have a number of countries,
we have per capita income for
each country standardized.
Infant mortality in that country,
region, and
then indicator of whether
that country exports oil.
The log of infant mortality
is our response variable.
And previously, the log of income and
the oil indicator were used as
covariants in the linear model.
Remember also that we had missing values
in the data set which we will remove and
we also need to calculate the log
transformations for income and
infant mortality.
And just to verify, let's look
at the structure of the dataset.
We still have income infant mortality,
region,
oil, and now, the log of income and
the log of infant mortality.
We've dropped down to 101 observations.
Now let's talk about the model string for
this hierarchical model.
In the likelihood portion, of course,
we have the loop looping
over all of the data points.
The ith response which is log of
infant mortality comes from a normal
distribution with mu sub i and we have
the linear portion of the model connected
to the mean of that normal likelihood.
Previously, we had an intercept
here as well as these two terms.
The modification we're making for
this hierarchical model is similar to what
we did with the lambdas in the chocolate
chip cookie hierarchical model.
Each region now gets its own intercept.
So for example if the 50th
country is from region 3,
the model will fit mu 3 using intercept 3.
This is a nested index.
Each of these intercepts will come
from the same normal distribution.
So we will loop over j from 1 to
the maximum number of regions,
and each of these intercepts comes from
a normal distribution with mean a0 and
precision prec_a.
Of course, for the next level in the
hierarchy we need to produce priors for
a0 and prec_a.
The mean of this distribution
represents the mean of all intersects.
And the precision is related to
the variance of these intersects.
We'll use fairly standard priors here.
We'll use a normal distribution
centered on 0 for a0.
And we'll use an inverse gamma prior on
the variance of that normal distribution,
which implies a gamma
prior on the precision.
Rather than monitor the precision,
we're going to monitor tou,
which will be the standard deviation
of this normal distribution.
The remaining lines are the same as
they were for the linear model before.
We need to provide priors for
each of the coefficients in
the linear part of the model and
of course we need to produce a prior for
the precision in the likelihood.
Let's go ahead and
load in all of these pieces here and
set the seed and run the data.
This should look just like we had
before except we're now adding
a numeric variable which
indicates the region.
Previously that $region
was a factor variable.
We're turning into a numeric variable.
If I run just this piece you can
see that there are four regions.
As we move through the data set
the index of the region changes.
Don't forget also that the is_oil
was changed to be 0s and
1s, indicating whether
the country exports oil.
One other important thing to
check is whether all of the oil
exporting countries
are within a single region.
If that were the case,
our model could potentially suffer from
confounding because we wouldn't know
whether it's the oil variable or
the region variable that's affecting,
that is potentially explaining some of
the variability in infant mortality.
It looks like this is not the case.
This row represents the oil
exporting countries.
The only region not
represented is region 4.
We're going to monitor
all of these parameters,
including the hierarchical parameters for
the intercepts a_zero, and tou.
Let's go ahead and
initialize the model, update the model,
run a burn-in period, and
we'll collect our posterior samples.
We won't go through all of the steps here,
but
it's always important to check
your convergence diagnostics.
Let's take a look at
the trace plots really fast.
We need to add ask=TRUE to this line.
These trace plots don't look green.
They appear to be highly auto correlated.
And so if you wanted to create posterior
probability intervals as part of
your inferences from this model, it would
be a good idea to run these chains for
many more iterations.
Let's look at the next set.
We have some pretty high auto correlation
within these different chains for
the first beta coefficient.
The other beta coefficient looks
just fine as well as the trace for
the standard deviation of the likelihood.
This trace plot also looks pretty good.
Next, let's compare this model with the
old linear model from before using DIC,
we'll run the DIC samples here.
We get about 221.
Remember, the previous
linear model that we fit,
including the is_oil covariate,
had a DIC value of about 229.
So it appears that this
model is an improvement
over the non hierarchical one fit earlier.
Notice also that the penalty term
which is interpreted as the effective
number of parameters is less than the
actual number of parameters in this model.
We have nine parameters.
We have fewer effective parameters in this
model because they are sharing information
or borrowing strength from each
other in a hierarchical structure.
If we had skipped the hierarchy and
fit only one intercept,
there would have been four
parameters in this model.
If we had fit separate
independent intercepts for
each region,
there would have been seven parameters.
This is actually pretty close
to what we ended up with.
Finally, let's look at our posterior
summary of our inferences from this model.
Here are our posterior means for the four
linear intercepts one for each region.
The overall mean for those intercepts,
the standard deviation of the intercepts,
that is how the intercepts from each
region differ from one another,
are coefficient for income and
our coefficient for
oil exporting countries.
Each of these coefficients
is smaller in magnitude
than it was in the previous model,
possibly because the region variable is
now explaining some of the variability.
However, the signs of these coefficients
remain the same as they were before.
In this particular model, the intercepts
do not have a real interpretation
because they correspond to the mean
response for a country that does not
produce oil and
has $0 of log income per capita.
In other words that would be $1 of income
per capita, which is not the case for
these countries.
In this example we have not
investigated adding interaction terms,
which might be appropriate.
We only considered adding
hierarchy on the intercepts.
But in reality nothing prevents
us from doing the same for
other terms in the model, such as
the coefficients for income and oil.
We could try any or
all of these alternatives and
see how the DIC changes for these models.
This, together with other
model checking techniques,
including residual checks that
we've discussed, could be used to
identify our best model that you could
use to make inferences and predictions.